New Varint Encoding (#1016)
moq-wg/moq-transport: draft-ietf-moq-transport.md

Integers are encoded in 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, or 9 bytes and can encode up to 64
bit unsinged integers. The following table summarizes the encoding properties.

|--------------|----------------|-------------|------------------------|
| Leading Bits | Length (bytes) | Usable Bits | Range                  |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|------------------------|
| 0            | 1              | 7           | 0-127                  |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|------------------------|
| 10           | 2              | 14          | 0-16383                |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|------------------------|
| 110          | 3              | 21          | 0-2097151              |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|------------------------|
| 1110         | 4              | 28          | 0-268435455            |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|------------------------|
| 11110        | 5              | 35          | 0-34359738367          |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|------------------------|
| 111110       | 6              | 42          | 0-4398046511103        |

> |--------------|----------------|-------------|------------------------|

Reviewer: somehow I remember to remove entry for 5 as well from the last interim ?

| 11111110     | 8              | 56          | 0-72057594037927935    |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|------------------------|
| 11111111     | 9              | 64          | 0-18446744073709551615 |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|------------------------|
{: format title="Summary of Integer Encodings"}

The following table contains some example encodings:

|----------------------|----------------------------|
| Byte Sequence        | Decimal Value              |
|----------------------|----------------------------|
| 0x25                 | 37                         |
| 0x8025               | 37                         |
| 0xbbbd               | 15,293                     |
| 0xdd7f3e7d           | 494,878,333                |
| 0xfaa1a0e403d8       | 2,893,212,287,960          |
| 0xfefa318fa8e3ca11   | 70,423,237,261,249,041     |
| 0xffffffffffffffffff | 18,446,744,073,709,551,615 |
|----------------------|----------------------------|
{: format title="Example Integer Encodings"}

11111100 is an invalid code point.  An endpoint that receives this value MUST

> close the session with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

Reviewer 2: That's a very different code path.  Most of the cases involve blocking when we don't have enough data.  Stream termination from one of those blocking states causes an error, but the code that handles the parsing doesn't directly deal with that.

: Indicates that x is repeated zero or more times and that each instance
  has a length of L

> This document redfines the following RFC9000 syntax:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This document redefines the following RFC9000 syntax:
```

> x (i):

Reviewer 4: Can we change `(i)` to avoid confusion with QUIC?

Reviewer: I am also fine with x(i) as it is redefinition.  If not, x(V) seems fine to me

Reviewer 5: I posted somewhere already but I can't find it, so I want to repeat it here. I hate the idea of redefinition, it provides no value and only a source of eternal confusion. Please just pick a different identifier like `mi` or whatever. 

In isolation you think you have no issues. When I want to e.g. draw a diagram that renders how a MoQ control message is sent/received on an HTTP/3 stream I'm going to want to draw something like

```
STREAM Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x08..0x0f,
  Stream ID (i),
  [Offset (i)],
  [Length (i)],
  GOAWAY Message {
    Type (i) = 0x10,
    Length (16),
    New Session URI Length (i),
    New Session URI (..),
  }
```
see the ambiguity?

Author: I guess I'm sold by @LPardue's example.

Reviewer: +1 ...  how about we define  x(V64) to be very explicit about the intent of the type ?

@LPardue @afrind @fluffy   ??

> x (vi64):

Author: I had it as (i), and @LPardue made a convincing argument why not --

if you are trying to show the encoding of multiple protocol layers, then the MOQT (i) and the H3/QUIC (i) difference is not visible.

x (L) ...:

: Indicates that x is repeated zero or more times and that each instance

>   has a length of L

Author: ```suggestion
  has a length of L.
```

: Indicates that x is repeated zero or more times and that each instance
  has a length of L.

x (vi64):

: Indicates that x holds an integer value using the variable-length
  encoding as described below.

### Variable-Length Integers

MoQT requires a variable-length integer encoding with the following properties:

1. The encoded length can be determined from the first encoded byte.
2. The range of 1 byte values is as large as possible.
3. All 64 bit numbers can be encoded.

The variable-length integer encoding uses the most significant one to four
bits of the first byte to indicate the length of the encoding in bytes. The
remaining bits represent the integer value, encoded in network byte order.

Integers are encoded in 1, 2, 4, 8, or 9 bytes and can encode 7-, 14-, 29-, 60-,
or 64-bit values, respectively. The following table summarizes the encoding
properties.

|--------------|----------------|-------------|---------------|
| Leading Bits | Length (bytes) | Usable Bits | Range         |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|---------------|
| 0            | 1              | 7           | 0-127         |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|---------------|

> | 10           | 2              | 14          | 0-16,383      |

Reviewer 3: Thanks for updating the PR, this is definitely less confusing for me.

  as described in ({{?RFC9000, Section 16}}), followed by that many variable
  length tuple fields, each of which are encoded as (b) above.

> ### Variable-Length Integers

Reviewer 3: Can we move this earlier?  Because currently it's forward referenced.

Author: Yes, but let's sort the other comments first.

> RFC9000 variable-length integers use a two-bit length prefix in the first byte

Reviewer 5: I understand why you put this text here but it seems superfluous to talk about something that is not suitable for MoQT. Consider simply stating MoQT's requirements or abilities and then state how the encoding supports thst on the wire.

> RFC9000 variable-length integers use a two-bit length prefix in the first byte
> to determine the encoded length.  This limits the number of encodings to 4,
> reduces the value range of 1-byte encodings to 0-63, and prevents encoding full
> 64-bit numbers.  This encoding is not suitable for MoQT.

Author: ```suggestion
MoQT requires a variable-length integer encoding with the following properties:

1. The encoded length can be determined from the first encoded byte.
2. The range of 1 byte values is as large as possible.
3. All 64 bit numbers can be encoded.
```

3. All 64 bit numbers can be encoded.

> The variable-length integer encoding uses the most significant one to four 

Author: ```suggestion
The variable-length integer encoding uses the most significant one to four
```

bits of the first byte to indicate the length of the encoding in bytes. The
remaining bits represent the integer value, encoded in network byte order.

Integers are encoded in 1, 2, 4, 8, or 9 bytes and can encode 7-, 14-, 29-, 60-,
or 64-bit values, respectively. The following table summarizes the encoding
properties.

|--------------|----------------|-------------|---------------|
| Leading Bits | Length (bytes) | Usable Bits | Range         |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|---------------|
| 0            | 1              | 7           | 0-127         |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|---------------|
| 10           | 2              | 14          | 0-16,383      |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|---------------|
| 110          | 4              | 29          | 0-536,870,911 |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|---------------|
| 1110         | 8              | 60          | 0-2^60-1      |
|--------------|----------------|-------------|---------------|

> | 1111XXXX     | 9              | 64          | 0-2^64-1      |

Reviewer 4: I have no idea what this actually means.  What are the `XXXX`?

Do we expect to revisit this scheme later?  If the goal is to make "the range of 1 byte values is as large as possible", it would make more sense to just allocate 0x00~0xf8 values for those, but then we basically don't have two-byte varints.

Author: > I have no idea what this actually means. What are the XXXX?

The 9 byte encoding uses 4 bits for length with 4 reserved bits.

> Do we expect to revisit this scheme later?

No.  If we make the switch let's go from QUIC to MoQ varints once and never look back.  Now is the time to propose new schemes.

> allocate 0x00~0xf8 values for those, but then we basically don't have two-byte varints.

To clarify, you if the first byte is > 0xf8 the length is `value - 0xf8 + 1`?  Technically you have 2 byte varints but they only encode 7 values that can't be encoded in 1 byte.  These things are all about tradeoffs and I'm agnostic if the group prefers 248 1-byte values, at the expense of more bytes for larger values.  It might be bad for shortish payload lengths (eg: 300-1200 bytes, though datagrams don't have a length field).

Author: @fluffy sounds good to me.  Would you have it be an error to receive 11110001-11111111?  I don't want to check those bits in my decoder.

Reviewer 6: I don't care if the receiver never checks them, I just care that senders set them all zero and that future extensions can negotiate using them. 

That said, it really does not seem a big deal to check and it's going to be easier to debug if you get a great reason phrase explaining what is going on when they are not valid.

|--------------|----------------|-------------|---------------|
{: format title="Summary of Integer Encodings"}

> To reduce unnecessary use of bandwidth, variable length integers SHOULD

Author: ```suggestion
The four least significant bits of the first byte are reserved in 9-byte
encodings.

To reduce unnecessary use of bandwidth, variable length integers SHOULD
```

be encoded using the least number of bytes possible to represent the
required value.

> A sample decoding algorithm is in {{sample-decoding}}.

Author: ```suggestion
A sample encoding and decoding algorithm is in {{sample-varint}}.
```

  as described in ({{?RFC9000, Section 16}}), followed by that many variable
  length tuple fields, each of which are encoded as (b) above.

### Variable-Length Integers

MoQT requires a variable-length integer encoding with the following properties:

1. The encoded length can be determined from the first encoded byte.
2. The range of 1 byte values is as large as possible.
3. All 64 bit numbers can be encoded.

> The variable-length integer encoding reserves the most one to four significant
> bits of the first byte to encode the length of the integer encoding in
> bytes. The integer value is encoded on the remaining bits, in network byte
> order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The variable-length integer encoding uses the most significant one to four 
bits of the first byte to indicate the length of the encoding in bytes. The remaining bits 
represent the integer value, encoded in network byte order.```

* Status Code: An integer status code indicating why the subscription ended.

* Stream Count: An integer indicating the number of data streams the publisher
  opened for this subscription.  This helps the subscriber know if it has
  received all of the data published in this subscription by comparing the
  number of streams received.  The subscriber can immediately remove all
  subscription state once the same number of streams have been processed.  If
  the track had Forwarding Preference = Datagram, the publisher MUST set Stream
  Count to 0.  If the publisher is unable to set Stream Count to the exact
  number of streams opened for the subscription, it MUST set Stream Count to a

>   value greater than or equal to 2^60. Subscribers SHOULD use a timeout or other

Reviewer 3: Why 2^60?

Author: The maximum number of peer initiated uni streams in a quic connection is 2^60.  Sadly it doesn't fit in an 8 byte int, which can only encode up to 2^60-1.

Reviewer 3: Thanks, of course.

--- back

> # Sample Variable-Length Integer Decoding {#sample-decoding}

Author: ```suggestion
# Sample Variable-Length Integer Encoding and Decoding {#sample-varint}

The WriteVarint function takes two parameters, a 64 bit integer and an
output buffer with an append operation.

~~~pseudocode
Function WriteVarint(value, output):
    if value <= 127:
        output.append(value, 1)
    else if value <= 16383:
        output.append(networkByteOrder(uint16_t(value | 0x8000)), 2)
    else if value <= 536870911:
        output.append(networkByteOrder(uint32_t(value | 0xC0000000)), 4)
    else if value <= 1152921504606846975:
        output.append(networkByteOrder(uint64_t(value | 0xE000000000000000)), 8)
    else:
        output.append(0xF0, 1)
        output.append(networkByteOrder(value), 8)
~~~
        
```

> The function ReadVarint takes a single argument -- a sequence of bytes, which

Reviewer 5: The RFC editor gets twitchy about pseudo code. Since this emulates RFC 9000's section, I suggest more closely copying the prose a markdown behind https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9000#section-a.1

can be read in network byte order.

> ~~~

Author: ```suggestion
~~~pseudocode
```

ReadVarint(data):
  lengths = [ 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 2, 4, 4, 8, 9 ]
  masks = [ 0x7f, 0x7f, 0x7f, 0x7f, 0x7f, 0x7f, 0x7f, 0x7f,
            0x3f, 0x3f, 0x3f, 0x3f, 0x1f, 0x1f, 0x0f, 0x00 ]
  // The length of variable-length integers is encoded in the
  // first one to four bits of the first byte.
  v = data.next_byte()
  prefix = v >> 4
  length = lengths[prefix]
  mask = masks[prefix]

  // Once the length is known, remove these bits and read any
  // remaining bytes.
  v = v & mask
  repeat length-1 times:
    v = (v << 8) + data.next_byte()
  return v
~~~

> 

Reviewer 5: Rfc 9000 provides a concrete example, that would be nice here as a simple test vector

Reviewer: @afrind  It would also be nice to add a encode algorithm as well.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
For example, the nine-byte sequence 0xf0ffffffffffffffff decodes to the decimal
value 18,446,744,073,709,551,615; the eight-byte sequence 0xe2197c5eff14e88c
decodes to the decimal value 151,288,809,941,952,652; the four-byte sequence
0xdd7f3e7d decodes to 494,878,333; the two-byte sequence 0xbbbd decodes to
15,293; and the single byte 0x25 decodes to 37 (as does the two-byte sequence
0x8025).

```

--- back

# Sample Variable-Length Integer Encoding and Decoding {#sample-varint}

> 

Author: I'm mirroring RFC 9000 here, but I don't have a strong opinion.

> 

Reviewer 3: This is in an appendix, correct?
